{{Website Links
1. http://www.bobs-bugs.info/2014/01/02/hymenoptera-bees-wasps-ants-etc/
2. https://www.oregon.gov/ODA/shared/Documents/Publications/IPPM/ODABeeGuide.pdf
3. https://ir.library.oregonstate.edu/downloads/m613n331f 
4. https://www.jstor.org/stable/25084960?seq=1 
5. https://www.amentsoc.org/insects/fact-files/orders/hymenoptera-symphyta.html 
6. https://jhr.pensoft.net/article/27704/
7. https://riversedgewest.org/sites/default/files/resource-center-documents/Carril%20et%20al%202018%20Bees%20GSENM%20%281%29.pdf 
8. https://www.biotaxa.org/Zootaxa/article/view/zootaxa.3765.2.4
9. https://blogs.ethz.ch/osmiini/phylogeny-and-classification/ 
10. https://leafyplace.com/types-of-bees/ 
11. https://idtools.org/id/bees/exotic/bees_classification.php
}}




Bumble bees
 There are about 50 species of North American bumble bees. Many people are familiar with bumble bees. They are large, furry, and mostly black with stripes of yellow, white, or even bright orange. Bumble bees have some things in common with honey bees; they are more sociable than most other native bees, forming colonies with one queen and many workers. However, bumble bee colonies are never as big or as long lived as those of honey bees. Bumble bees are ground nesters with most making their nests in an underground cavity or in rare cases, above ground partly covered by thatch. The cavities they need for their nests are larger than those of solitary bees, so the first thing that a young queen does in the spring is to find an abandoned mouse nest or a similar burrow. Then she starts preparing it for her brood. She builds a few wax pots that she fills up with pollen and honey, and a larger cell for her brood. Once provisioned the queen lays her eggs, laying no more than half a dozen at first. These eldest offspring are all sterile female workers. Once this brood is fully grown, the queen rarely leaves the nest again and spends all her time laying more eggs while the workers take care of all the activities in and out of the nest. Genus: Bombus Some of the most important native pollinators of agricultural crops, bumble bees are large and hairy. Unlike honey bees, bumble bees perform well in greenhouses and can forage when the weather is too cold or wet. Like honey bees, bumble bees carry pollen in a corbicula, or pollen basket. Preferred Crops: Many, especially blueberry, cranberry, and red clover grown for seed. Nesting Behavior: Bumble bees are social. Colonies are made up of a queen, workers, and males. There are both cavity and ground nesting species.




Carpenter bees 
 Carpenter bees are typically large and black. You may have trouble telling them apart from bumble bees except for one very distinctive feature: bumble bees are fuzzy all over, while the upper abdomen of carpenter bees is almost hairless, appearing glossy. Early in the spring, males prospect for promising courtship and mating sites, not because they plan to set up housekeeping, but because they know that such places will attract females. They patrol the territory zealously chasing away other males that venture too close. In fact, sometimes they chase away almost anything that moves, including surprised human gardeners. Fortunately, they cannot sting (only females have stingers), so there is nothing to fear and you can let them be. Females have powerful mandibles and use them Above: Female of the Yellow-faced bumble bee (Bombus vosnesenskii) in flight. Below: Female of the widespread bumble bee Bombus pensylvanicus. 17 to excavate wide tunnel systems in which they build their nests, hence their common name of carpenter bee.




Squash bees
 Squash bees (Peponapis and Xenoglossa) pollinate flowers of squash, pumpkins, melons, and other cucurbits. Peponapis squash bees are dependent only on the pollen cucurbits. Squash bees are about the same size and brownish coloration of honey bees. You can easily tell them apart by their behaviors when they are near flowers of these crops. Squash bees are finetuned to the daily rhythms of cucurbit flowers. They begin their work shift at or before dawn when the flowers of these valuable crop plants are opening.




Southeastern Blueberry Bees
 The southeastern blueberry bee (Habropoda laboriosa) gets its common name from the fact that it forages primarily on blueberries (Vaccinium spp). Its native range is the southeastern United States. Southeastern blueberry bees are only active for a few weeks each year. It just so happens that their active season coincides with when blueberries are in flower. Compared to honey bees, blueberry bees are faster and more efficient pollinators of blueberry flowers. The reason for this is that the anthers of the blueberry flower are tubular with an opening pore only at one end. The southeastern blueberry bee attaches herself to the blueberry flower and vibrates her flight muscles very rapidly. Like shaking a salt shaker, pollen comes out of the opening of the anther and is collected by the southeastern blueberry bee. When she moves on to the next blueberry flower, her buzz pollination not only shakes out the pollen but causes pollen clinging to her body to attach to the stigma and pollinates the flower.




Megachilidae
 This family contains mason bees and leaf-cutter bees. The females use leaves and/or mud in their nest construction. Most of these bees nest in holes, either in wood or hollow twigs, but there are also a few that nest in the ground. There are a few species within this family that are not native to the United States, but that have been introduced either intentionally or unintentionally in this country. An interesting characteristic of the bees of this family is that they don’t carry the pollen on their back legs but on the underside of their abdomens. If you happen to see a bee, about the size of a honey bee, with a yellow belly dusted with pollen, you can be sure that it is a megachilid bee (although sometimes the color of the pollen it is carrying may be white). However, some megachilid bees carry such large yellow/orange loads of pollen that they look like flying “cheetos” snacks.




Sweat bees (Halictidae)
 Some of the most beautiful bees belong to this family. With their shiny metallic-colored bodies, these bees will capture your heart. Many are metallic green, but others have shades of color from blue to copper or gold, and sometimes even black. Most nest in the ground. Some are solitary while others share the entrance to their nests. In most cases, that is all they share and are not truly social. However, a few sweat bee species go a step further and show some division of labor in guarding the entrance to their homes and rearing their young. Usually they are sisters that originated from the same nest. Some species of sweat bees can be considered truly social; with a division of labor in which the mother and founder of the colony lays eggs while the daughters do all the other work. Some unusually attractive halictids (green, yellow and black-striped Agapostemon species) are found throughout North America. One of the prettiest halictid bees is Augochlora pura (the name means the pure magnificent green bee) found in the eastern United States. It has the peculiar habit of building her nest under the bark of a rotted log. She takes advantage of the loose, half-rotted material to make the housing, adding her own saliva and secretions to build an envelope for her eggs and accumulated pollen. She kneads the pollen into a number of little loaves shaped like tiles, which she then plasters on the inner wall of the brood chamber and then lays an egg before sealing the cell completely. This precaution is necessary due to foraging ants and other predators that abound under loose bark.




Striped Green Sweat Bees (Agapostemon)
 Striped green sweat bees have a smooth black and yellow striped abdomen and metallic green head and thorax. Striped green bees have long slender bodies and no discernible hairs on them. They have a striking appearance with dark antennae, lightly-colored long legs, and shiny bodies. Striped green sweat bees are found in temperate regions in North and South America. These sweat bee species have flight patterns similar to honey bees and bumble bees. The distinguishing features of striped green sweat bees are their metallic green shiny head. Their striped reddish or yellow and black abdomens sometimes have a metallic shimmer also.




Miner bees (Andrenidae)
 The andrenid bees are all ground nesters and thus the common name miner bees. They are mostly dark, black, or reddish, but they can be metallic blue, yellow, or red and yellow. They are often shy, medium- to large-sized bees. They can be distinguished from other bees by the velvety patches (foveae) on their faces, between the eyes and the base of the antennae, though these patches are often visible only under a microscope. Many are active only in the early spring. The next generation remains underground developing through the summer, fall, and winter only to emerge the next spring when their favorite flowers are in bloom.




Colletidae 
 This is a small family of solitary bees which is considered more primitive than other families of bees. Some of them such as the yellow-masked bees, Hylaeus, do not have baskets in which to carry pollen. Instead, these bees carry pollen inside their crops. They are not as hairy as other bees and can easily be mistaken for wasps. They all nest in pithy stems. Sometimes they form large aggregations of closely spaced nests. They use a cellophane-like material exuded from glands to line the brood cells where they lay their eggs; so sometimes they are called cellophane bees. Bee Mimics Last but not least, there are superb impersonators of bees, the flower flies or syrphids. Don’t be fooled by them. Despite their appearance, they are not bees but flies. They are frequent flower visitors, and they don’t have a stinger like most bees. They masquerade as bees to fool hungry birds. 




Honey bees (Apis mellifera)
 They are not native to North America. They were brought here by European settlers in the 1620s. Prized for honey production, they have large, perennial, colonies that can be easily transported and which can pollinate many different crops. For these reasons, they are the most widely used commercial pollinator in the world. The workers are all females. Honey Bees carry pollen in a corbicula, or pollen basket, a small basket of specialized hairs on their hind legs. Preferred Crops: Many Nesting Behavior: Honey bees are highly social cavity nesters. Hives have on average 25,000 individuals made up of a reproductive queen, workers, and males (drones).




Small Metallic Sweat Bees (Seladonia)
 Seladonia consists of species within the genus Halictus that are small and metallic. Their color varies from metallic green to bronze. They are just as common as other sweat bees but often go unnoticed because they are tiny. Small metallic sweat bees carry pollen on their hind legs and on hairs on the underside of the body. Preferred Crops: Many, especially carrot and cherry Nesting Behavior: Seladonia are partially social and nest in tunnels in the ground.




Sweat Bees (Lasioglossum)
 Similar to Halictus in size and color, species of Lasioglossum can be distinguished by the placement of abdominal hairbands on the top edge of abdominal segments. Sweat bees carry pollen on their hind legs and on hairs on the underside of the body. Preferred Crops: Many, especially cherry, cane berries, meadow foam, and cole crops. Nesting Behavior: Predominantly solitary. Lasioglossum nest in small tunnels in the ground.




Small Sweat Bees (Dialictus)
 Dialictus consists of species within the genus Lasioglossom that are small and metallic. Their color varies from metallic green to bronze to gold. Like Seladonia, they frequently go unnoticed because of their small size, despite being incredibly common. Small sweat bees carry pollen on their hind legs and on hairs on the underside of the body. Preferred Crops: Many, especially cherry and carrot seed. Nesting Behavior: Predominantly solitary. Dialictus nest in small tunnels in the ground.




Carder Bee (Anthidium)
 Carder bees are large black and yellow bees that are a similar size to honey bees. Looking closely at these big bees, you’ll notice tufts of hairs on their legs and sides. The yellow markings on their abdomen don’t wrap all the way around their bodies, and they have a smooth black back. It’s easy to mistake carder bees for yellow-jackets as their yellow and black markings are similar. However, carder bees are hairier than the more aggressive yellow hornets. Carder bees are in the family Megachilidae, so, like leafcutter bees, they cut leaves to use in nests. These large bees also use resin, mud, and plant hairs to form their nests. Looking at pictures of carder bees, you’ll notice three horns at their abdominal apex. Carder bees are large yellow and black bees with tufts of tiny spines on their legs. You can identify these bees by their bright yellow or red markings on their abdomens’ underside and sides.




Metallic Sweat Bees (Agapostemon)
 Members of the genus Agapostemon are a brilliant metallic green. Some species have dark abdomens, while others are entirely metallic green. Males often have yellow bands on the abdomen. Like most sweat bees, they are generalists and can be found in many crops. Metallic sweat bees carry pollen on their hind legs and on some hairs on the underside of the body. Preferred Crops: Many, especially carrot and flowers grown for seed. Nesting Behavior: Predominantly solitary. Agapostemon nest in small tunnels in the ground.




Mining Bees (Andrena)
 Some of the first bees to emerge in spring, members of the genus Andrena vary greatly in size and appearance. Females can be recognized by patches of velvety hairs between the eyes. Mining bees carry pollen on their hind legs and on hairs between the abdomen and the thorax. Preferred Crops: Apple, cherry, peach, and pear. Nesting Behavior: Solitary. Andrena nest in small tunnels in the ground.




Leafcutter Bees (Megachile)
 Both Megachile and the genus Osmia belong to the family Megachilidae, meaning “large jaw,” referring to their large mandibles. Megachile are non-metallic and dark bodied, often with abdominal hair bands. They are called leafcutter bees because they cut small pieces of leaves and flowers to line their nest cells. Leafcutter bees carry pollen on specialized hairs on the abdomen. Preferred Crops: Alfalfa, onion, carrot, and sunflower. Nesting Behavior: Solitary. Megachile nest in cracks and crevices of wood or rock, in beetle holes, in pithy stems, and occasionally in the ground.




Mason Bees (Osmia)
 Like leafcutter bees, Osmia have large jaws and big heads. They range in color from metallic blue to green, occasionally black. Their abdomens often have a rounded appearance. Osmia are called mason bees because they use mud to make their nest cells. Several species are managed for agricultural production. Mason bees carry pollen on specialized hairs on the abdomen. Preferred Crops: Apple, blueberry, cane berries, cherry, and strawberry. Nesting Behavior: Solitary. Osmia nest in cracks and crevices of wood or rock, in beetle holes, in pithy stems, and occasionally in the ground. 




Small Carpenter Bees (Ceratina)
 Certina are small mostly hairless bees that vary in color from dark metallic blue to green. They emerge in the spring and stay active until fall. Small carpenter bees have rudimentary pollen-carrying hairs. They may transport pollen by swallowing it and regurgitating it back at the nest. This behavior has been observed in primitive bees. Preferred Crops: Apple, cane berries, cherry, pear, and strawberry. Nesting Behavior: Solitary. Ceratina nest in stems, and can frequently be found in plants with pithy stems, like blackberry.




Long-horned Bees (Melissodes)
 Melissodes are called long-horned bees because males have unusually long antennae. They are large and stout bees that vary greatly in color from black to silver, and may or may not have abdominal banding. They typically do not emerge until summer. Long-horned bees have large brushlike hairs on their back legs that they use to carry pollen. Preferred Crops: Flowers and herbs grown for seed, sunflowers, and other plants within the daisy family. Nesting Behavior: Solitary. Melissodes nest in tunnels in the ground.




Long-Horn Bees (Eucerini)
 Long-horned bees are solitary bees with about 500 species in 32 genera in the tribe Eucerini. Between the species of long-horned bees, there are few common identifying features. Long-horn bees have hairy bodies and legs with black and tan markings. One common distinguishable feature is their long antennae. Long-horn bees are commonly found feeding on pollen on sunflowers. These bees don’t produce honey and live a solitary existence where they nest in small tunnels. Long-horn bees generally have pale bands on black fuzzy bodies and two long antennae. Their six legs are hairy and a dark tan color.




Subfamily: Colletinae
 Colletinae is a world-wide subfamily including three tribes of which only Colletini is found in the Northwest. Females of this subfamily have a scopa and construct burrows in the soil. In the Northwest they are easily distinguished from Hylaeinae by their abundant pubescence. Tribe Colletini. Colletini is primarily a Holarctic tribe apparently containing only the genus Colletes. Paracolletini is pan-austral and Caupolicanini is Neotropical, but at least a few species of each are found in the southwestern states. The absence of a pygidial plate separates Colletini from Paracolletini, and the arcuation of m-cu in the forewing separates it from Caupolicanini. 




Genus: Colletes Latreille
 Colletes is a large genus with about 115 North American species and 21 northwestern species. It extends into South America and Africa but is not found in Australia. Bees in this genus are moderate in size, with entirely black integument, and usually with well-defined abdominal hair bands. They can be distinguished from andrenids and melittids, which they superficially resemble, by the arcuate m-cu of the forewing. 




Subfamily: Hylaeinae
 Hylaeinae is a world-wide subfamily represented by six or more genera which are not usually grouped into tribes. Only the genus Hylaeus occurs in North America. The subfamily is characterized by the absence of external pollen-transporting structures; the pollen is mixed with the nectar in the honey stomach. Most members of this subfamily are small and all species are nearly hairless. Although wasp-like in appearance and lacking a scopa, it is believed that these are specialized characteristics and do not represent direct links with sphecid ancestors. Genus 




Hylaeus
 Hylaeus is a world-wide genus with about 50 species in North America, of which at least 20 occur in the Northwest. Although varying somewhat in size and extent of yellow maculation, members of this genus are so distinct from other North American bees that there is never a problem in distinguishing them. The jet black, nearly naked body, the triangular face with a long clypeus, the light maculations (in nearly all species), the two submarginal cells of which the second is much smaller than the first, and the absence of a scopa and a pygidium make a highly characteristic combination of characters. 




Family: Halictidae
 Halictidae is composed of three subfamilies which are very distinctive but have enough in common to form a clearly recognizable unit. They share long prepalpal parts of the galeae and absence of mfentum and submentum; have complete or partial pre-episternal sutures ; and lack facial foveae. The jugal lobes of the hind wings are long, and the hypostoma is fused with the tentorium. The family has several features in common with Colletidae and could have diverged from one of the more primitive forms of that group. It also holds a number of characteristics in common with Melittidae and Andrenidae, but these groups seem to have had a somewhat later origin. There is no clear evidence that any of the "higher" families of bees (Apidae, Anthophoridae, or Megachilidae) were derived from a halictid stock, although some of the apids bear some resemblance to halictids and both groups have many species with social behavior. Since the three halictid subfamilies are all rather homogeneous, tribal associations cannot be made unequivocally and hence are not considered here. 




Subfamily: Halictinae
 Halictinae is a large but remarkably homogeneous subfamily. It is world-wide in distribution and has many closely related genera. Group characteristics are most evident in the females, and in many genera the males are all but impossible to separate. Numerous attempts have been made to establish a number of genera closely related to Halictus, but differentiating characters seem rather inconsequential and apply only to females in most cases. The most distinctive character of this subfamily is the strongly bent basal vein of the forewing. Another feature, equally as distinctive and nearly as universal, is the linear, longitudinal pseudopygidium on the fifth tergum of the females from which the name "furrow bees" was derived. However, this character is weak or absent on the parasitic genus Sphecodes and the Old World pollen-collecting genus Nomioides. 




Genus: Halictus Latreille
 Halictus is a large, worldwide genus—here considered in the inclusive "European" sense. In the United States the generic names Dialictus, Chloralictus, Paralictus, Evylaeus, Lasioglossum, Hemihalictusl Sphecodogastra, Seladonia, Odontalictus, and Halictus have been used for various species in our genus Halictus (Mitchell, 1960). Michener (1944a) recognized two North American genera from the above list, Halictus for the last three and Lasioglossum for the first seven. However, in our opinion, the differences between Halictus and Lasioglossum sensu Michener are no greater than those between several of the groups within Lasioglossum. A revision of the North American Halictus is needed before a reasonable estimate of the number of species can be made. Muesebeck and others (1951) listed about 260 names as valid, and of these we estimate at least SO are found in the Northwest. The subgenus Dialictus (=Chloralictus of authors) is the most numerous in species, followed by the subgenera Evylaeus, Lasioglossum, and Halictus. Halictus is readily distinguished from Sphecodes by the presence of a strong pseudopygial plate in the female, somewhat finer sculpturing in both sexes, and the shape and vestiture of the face in the male. It can be distinguished from Augochlora and Agapostemon by the absence of brilliant metallic coloring.




Genus: Agapostemon Guerin-Meneville
 Agapostemon is a small North American genus with about 10 species of which 5 are known to occur in the Northwest. It is a homogeneous and easily recognized group. In the Northwest the only other rather brilliantly green metallic halictid is a single species of Augochlora. From this it is readily distinguished by the yellow- and black-banded abdomen of the male, the absence of the basitibial plates, and the truncate and strongly carinate posterior margin of the horizontal surface of the propodeum of the female. Agapostemon is apparently allied to the other brilliantly metallic genera, all of which are supposedly of Neotropical origin. 




Genus: Augochlora Smith
 Augochlora is primarily a Neotropical genus with four species in America north of Mexico. Both sexes are brilliant metallic green and have the propodial enclosure rounded and not carinate behind. 




Genus: Sphecodes Latreille
 Sphecodes is a large, worldwide genus parasitic on Halictinae. One species, albilabris, is parasitic on an andrenid, Melitturga clavicornis. A revision is needed before the number of species in North America can be accurately judged, but on the basis of Muesebeck and others (1951) there are about 70 valid species of which perhaps 20 are found in the Northwest. Females of this genus differ markedly from other halictines in lacking all but a trace of a pseudopygial plate on the fifth tergite and in having poorly defined basitibial plates. This genus, like most other parasitic bees, has a coarsely sculptured integument. Females of most species have a dark red, polished abdomen. Many of the males have partly or entirely black abdomens. Besides the coarse sculpturing, males can be distinguished from Halictus (Evylaeus) by the combination of shorter antennae and face, more uniform facial pubescence, and entirely black clypeus. 




Subfamily: Nomiinae
 This is a large subfamily of morphologically diverse bees that are world-wide in distribution but represented in North America only by the genus Nomia. Nine genera are now recognized in the subfamily, but a world revision is badly needed before the systematic position of the genera can be understood. It is believed that Nomiinae is most closely allied to Halictinae, and that both subfamilies are of early origin. The remaining subfamily, 




Dufoureinae
 They probably arose more recently and represents a second evolutionary line of Halictidae. The nomiines may be distinguished from other halictids by: basal vein of forewing straight or only slightly curved; three submarginal cells in the forewing, with the third subequal to the first along the posterior margin; males with pygidial plates; and antennal sockets inserted at or above the middle of the face. 




Genus: Nomia Latreille
 Nomia is the only genus of the subfamily which occurs in both the Old and the New worlds. This large genus of moderate- to large-sized bees is represented in North America by 21 species, 3 of which are found in the Pacific Northwest. One species, N. melanderi, is the most important pollinator of alfalfa in the Pacific Northwest. It is distinguishable from all other Northwest bees by the iridescent, yellowish or greenish-yellow, integumental bands present on the abdominal tergites of both sexes. The other two species, A^. nevadensis and Af. triangulifera, lack integumental maculations and appear to collect pollen only from composites. Nomia can readily be distinguished from other North American bees by those characteristics used in the key and in the list of subfamily characteristics. 




Subfamily: Dufoureinae 
 Dufoureinae is a subfamily of moderate diversity and size, containing 12 genera, 6 of them found in North America and 3 in the Northwest. This subfamily is primarily Holarctic, but one genus is found in South America and two reach the Ethiopian and Oriental regions. Dufoureinae appears to be about equally related to Halictinae and Nomiinae on the basis of characteristics described in the subfamily table, but its distribution indicates a somewhat more recent origin. Dufoureines are readily distinguished from other halictids by the low antennal sockets; short, protuberant clypeus; gently curved basal vein; and complete preepisternal suture. 




Genus: Dufourea Lepeletier
Dufourea is by far the largest genus in the subfamily, with about 60 North American and 14 northwestern species. Considerable diversity is found in the genus, and many generic names have been proposed by earlier systematists in recognition of these differences. In Europe, Dufourea and "Halictoides" are considered distinct, but in this country they blend imperceptibly. The genus is distinguishable from Conanthalictus by the absence of a real pygidium in the male and the relatively well-punctured integument in both sexes. A more obvious characteristic is the presence of two submarginal cells in Dufourea, although some specimens of Conanthalictus can be found with only two. It differs from Micralictoides in the deeper punctures and longer marginal cell. Metasomal sternite VIII of the male is deeply bilobed basally instead of being unilobed, and metasomal sternite VII has relatively straight posterior arms. 




Genus: Conanthalictus Cockerell
 Conanthalictus is a small, primarily southwestern genus some relationship with Protodufourea, another southwestern genus with three submarginal cells. Species of Conanthalictus are all small, weakly punctured, feebly metallic blue or blue-green in color, have sparse body pubescence, and lack basal and apical abdominal fasciae. 




Genus: Micralictoides Timberlake
 Micralictoides is a small genus of about six species found in California, Arizona, and Nevada. Only one species is known to reach the Northwest. The genus resembles small species of Dufourca in body form and in its two submarginal cells. However, the peculiar form of the seventh and eighth sternites and genitalia of the male indicate that the relationship is not very close. It was probably derived independently from an ancestor with three submarginal cells. The broad, shallow body punctures of the integument and relatively short marginal cells are distinctive features.




Family: Andrenidae
 Andrenidae is the largest bee family in North America in terms of number of species, but from the standpoint of diversity of higher categories it is smaller than either Anthophoridae or Megachilidae. Of the two distinct subfamilies in the Northwest, Andreninae and Panurginae, the former is more numerous in species and the latter more numerous in genera. Andrenidae is best represented in the Holarctic region, but many panurgine genera are found in the Neotropical and Ethiopian regions. On the basis of its distribution and certain specialized characters, such as the absence of a pre-episternal suture, it is considered to have a later origin than either the Colletidae or Halictidae, possibly from an early melittid-like ancestor. Andrenids are always somewhat dorsoventrally flattened and have an oval rather than parallel-sided abdomen. The metanotum is horizontal and the female pygidium is conspicuous. The face is nearly always rather flat, and the inner orbital margins are not arcuate above and seldom convergent below. The principal northwestern genus of Melittidae, Hesperapis, most nearly resembles those Andrena with two submarginal cells in the forewing, but Hesperapis can be distinguished by the absence of facial foveae and the shining vertex and upper portion of the frons. Andrenids are sometimes confused with certain halictine species, but the straight or only slightly curved basal vein in the former serves to separate them. They also resemble certain dufoureine halictids, but they can be distinguished at once by their antennal insertions which are at the middle of the face. The two northwestern subfamilies of andrenids differ as shown in the tabulation below. 




Subfamily: Andreninae
 Andreninae is a very homogeneous subfamily, represented in the Northwest by the genus Andrena, and in the Southwest by two other genera, closely related to Andrena. The subfamily is almost entirely Holarctic in distribution with only a few species occurring as far south as Central America and the northern plains of India. Andrenine bees are generally more densely pilose than panurgine bees and this is often most conspicuous on the face. Integumental maculations of Andreninae, if present, are confined to the clypeus and the lower portion of the paraocular area. The many specific characters for distinguishing Andreninae from Panurginae are readily seen. 




Genus: Andrena Fabricius
 Andrena is primarily a Holarctic genus of moderate- to large-sized bees with approximately 200 species found in the Northwest and 1,000 in the world. About one fourth of the species of bees found in the Northwest are in this genus, and it is probably the largest genus of bees in the world. There are 34 recognized subgenera in North America, but because of the morphological homogeneity of the genus, they are difficult to characterize. 




Subfamily: Panurginae
 Panurginae includes a number of distinctive but rather closely related genera. In the Palearctic region, the genus Melitturga is quite distinct from the others and possibly warrants tribal designation. The North American genera are best considered in the single tribe, Panurgini. Because of the flattened and somewhat elongated palpal segments, Panurginae is usually considered to be more specialized than Andreninae; in fact Michener (1944a) expressed the opinion that the higher groups of bees might have arisen from an ancestral panurgine stock. Panurginae is best represented in the New World, both in North and South America. Most genera contain moderate numbers of species, but the number of Perdita species is very large. Panurgine bees are less pilose than andrenines in general and more extensively maculate, especially the males. The marginal cell, which is truncate or strongly bent away from the wing margin, facilitates identification. 




Genus: Perdita Smith
 This is a large genus of small to moderate-sized bees restricted to North America. Most of the species are found in the southwest area of the United States and in Mexico, although 46 species occur in the Northwest. Perdita, especially the maculate species, resembles Nomadopsis except that it is smaller and has conspicuously white wings with pale veins; dark areas of body submetallic, or body entirely yellow; vertex of head minutely roughened (plicate) between very fine punctures, if any; and the marginal cell bent away from the wing margin at nearly a right angle apically. 




Genus: Nomadopsis Ashmead
 Nomadopsis is a rather small genus of moderate-sized bees whose distribution is restricted to the New World. Integumental abdominal maculations are almost always present in this genus, which, together with Perdita, represents the only panurgines north of Mexico with this feature. Nomadopsis is represented in the Northwest by 15 species. It most closely resembles Perdita, but the species are nearly always larger and they have dark wing veins; dark areas of body nonmetallic; body never completely yellow; vertex of head shiny between moderatesized punctures; marginal cell bent away from the wing margin at about a 45° angle apically; and metasomal terga without distinct apical fasciae. 




Genus: Calliopsis Smith
 Calliopsis is a small genus of small to moderate-sized bees found only in the New World and represented in the Northwest by two species. This genus contains pale-haired bees with integumental maculations on the head and thorax like those of Nomadopsis, which it closely resembles in body form. It is readily separated from Nomadopsis by its nonmaculated abdomen, well-defined abdominal faciae, and shorter, narrower pterostigma. 




Genus: Panurginus Nylander
 Panurginus is a small Holarctic genus of small-sized, dark-haired, usually jet black bees with a yellow clypeus in some males. It is well represented in the Northwest by seven species that most closely resemble Pseudopanurgus. Panurginus can, however, be distinguished from Pseudopanurgus by the fine punctures and minutely roughed integument, especially around the vertex, and the characters cited in the key. Metasomal sternum VI of the male is thickened apically and shallowly emarginate medially. 




Genus: Pseudopanurgus Cockerell
 Pseudopanurgus is a moderate-sized genus restricted in distribution to the New World and represented in the Northwest by eight species. Pseudopanurgus resembles Panurginus but is more heavily armored and coarsely punctured. In addition, the areas between the punctures on the vertex of the head are shiny instead of minutely roughened as in Panurginus and Perdita. 




Family: Oxaeidae
 Oxaeidae is a small Neotropical family reaching as far north as the southwestern United States. It is mentioned here for the sake of completeness at the family level. Michener (1944a) considered it to be a subfamily of Andrenidae; but Rozen (1965a), on the basis of larval and adult characteristics, considered the taxon {Oxaea and Protoxaea) to form a small but distinctive family. Oxaeids resemble andrenids in general body form and in having two subantennal sutures below each antenna. They differ in having an extremely long marginal cell and almost no stigma. In addition, the females also lack arolia and have a vertical propodeum. There is an interesting convergence between males of Apis, Oxaeidae, Melitturga (a Paleartic panurgine), and Caupolicana (Neotropical colletid). They all have enlarged compound eyes, ocelli low on the face, elongate first flagellar segment, box-like thorax, short abdomen, and long, thin legs that hang downwards in flight. The similar mating habit, in which the males hover beneath the females and dart upwards after them in flight, apparently has been responsible for this convergence. 




Family: Melittidae 
 Although Melittidae is a small family from the standpoint of the number of species, its four subfamilies represent considerable diversity. Three of these subfamilies occur in North America and two are found in the Northwest. In degree of specialization, the family appears to be about equivalent to Andrenidae, but it probably arose separately from a progenitor common to both families. Since anthophorids have more characteristics in common with andrenids than with melittids, it seems likely that the higher bees arose from a primitive andrenid rather than a melittid branch. Melittidae superficially resembles Andrenidae but differs in lacking facial foveae and subantennal plates and from most andrenids in having the scopa confined to the posterior tibia and basitarsus. 




Subfamily: Dasypodinae 
 Dasypodinae is a Holarctic and Ethiopian subfamily with about six genera of which only Hesperapis occurs in North America. Division into tribes does not seem to be warranted. Members of the subfamily resemble Melittinae in general but differ in having two submarginal cells. Judging from genera we have seen, they also have longer hairs on the scopa and a more polished appearance of the vertex.




Genus: Hesperapis Cockerell
 Hesperapis has a peculiar distribution, with species known from southern Africaand western United States. There are about 22 North American species and 2 in the Northwest. The genus is characterized by long, rather sparse pubescence; a flat, usually "sway-backed" abdomen; well-defined abdominal fasciae; and a shining vertex. 




Subfamily: Macropidinae
 Macropidinae contains only the Holarctic genus Macropis. It is a highly specialized genus with an exceptionally long sting and very broad fore tibia and basitarsus. Genus Macropis Klug: There are only six known species of Macropis in North America of which only one, Macropis steironematis opaca, has been collected in the Northwest. As indicated, the genus is readily recognized by the characters mentioned above. The males with their yellow marked faces have some superficial resemblance to Pseudopanurgus, but they are easily distinguished from that genus by pointed marginal cells and broad basitarsus.




 Family: Fideliidae
 Fideliidae is a small family with two genera in South Africa and one in Chile. Michener (1944a) considered it as a subfamily of Apidae, but Moure and Michener (1955) decided that it is more primitive than any other family of long-tongued bees and elevated it to family rank. Fideliidae resembles Megachilidae in having an abdominal scopa and a long labrum. Unlike Megachilidae, basitibial plates are present, at least in the female, but they are weakly developed. The presence of tibial scopae (poorly developed in the Chilean genus), narrow mandibular apices, and three submarginal cells differentiate it readily from the Megachilidae. In spite of its long tongue, it has many apparently primitive characteristics, such as a partial pre-episternal suture, horizontal volsellae with cuspis and digitus, and large apical lobes of the seventh sternite of the male (except in the Chilean genus). 




Family: Megachilidae
 Megachilidae is a large family of specialized, morphologically rather uniform bees found throughout the world. It is well represented in the Northwest both at the generic (20 genera) and specific levels (219 species). The family appears to have had an earlier origin than that of other long-tongued bee families. Megachilidae is peculiar in several respects: (1) it represents the only family of bees whose members all have two submarginal cells; (2) all members have subantennal sutures directed to the outer edges of the antennal sockets (the outer subantennal sutures of Andrenidae are also directed to the outer edges of the antennal sockets but they appear to be evolved as secondary sutures) ; (3) the scopa of all nonparasitic females is restricted to the abdominal sterna; and (4) with the exception of Trachusa, Heteranthidium, some Anthidium, some Callanthidium, some Osmia, and some Megachile, all species nest in existing holes or in the open and construct cells from nonsecreted materials. Like most megachilids, the social Apidae and the genus Hylaeus, family Colletidae, construct cells in existing holes, but the cells are formed from secreted materials. Euglossini (Apidae) and some Centris (Anthophoridae) construct nests resembling those of megachilids which nest in existing holes, but since neither taxon occurs in the Northwest we feel that point (4), above, is valid within our area. Megachilidae is divided into two subfamilies, Megachilinae and Lithurginae, but only the former taxon is represented in the Northwest. 




Subfamily: Megachilinae
 Megachilinae can be distinguished from Lithurginae, a more primitive subfamily containing only the genus Lithurgics, by several characteristics: jugal lobe less than one-half as long as vannal lobe; epistomal suture complete; first metasomal tergite large, its posterior edge straight; posterior basitarsus much shorter than tibia; and posterior legs of males not expanded. Both subfamilies are world-wide in distribution, but Lithurgas is restricted to Mexico and the southern portion of the United States in North America. Megachilinae is divided into two distinct tribes (Anthidiini and Megachilini) by the characteristics cited in the tabulation at the top of the next page. Tribe Anthidiini. Anthidiini occurs on all major continents and is richly represented in the Northwest by nine genera. This tribe can easily be distinguished from other Northwest bees by a combination of several obvious characteristics: abdomen with integumental maculations; forewing with two submarginal cells; stigma small; jugal lobe greater than one fourth as long as vannal lobes. Before 1900 all the maculated, nonparasitic forms of this tribe were placed in the genus Anthidium. Since then, over 30 generic names have been proposed for various segregates, most of which are readily acceptable as genera or subgenera in that they are morphologically distinct, contain numerous species, and exhibit different nesting habits. At least one attempt (Moure, 1947) has been made to divide the Anthidiini into two tribes, Anthidiini sensu stricto and Dianthidiini, on the basis of the number of mandibular teeth and the point of insertion of the second recurrent vein. Unfortunately, these characteristics break down in Old World specimens, and there are instances (e.g., Paranthidiellum) where a genus has the mandibles of the dianthidiine type and the wing venation of the anthidiine type. 




Genus: Heteranthidium Cockerel
 Heteranthidium is a small genus of moderate- to large-sized North American bees containing nine species and represented in the Northwest by H. zebratum. Its close relationship with the most "primitive" genus in the tribe, Trachusa, is indicated by such characters held in common as fine body puncturation; general absence of carinae, sulci, and propodeal pits; and nesting burrows in the soil with cells composed of leaf cuttings and resin. Heteranthidium differs from Trachusa by the presence of integumental maculations on the abdomen and three- rather than fivesegmented maxillary palpi. However, Heteranthidium ridingsii has very limited pale maculations on the abdomen and its seventh metasomal tergum resembles that of Trachusa perdita. Furthermore, the Palearctic genus Archianthidium bridges Heteranthidium and Trachusa by possessing four-segmented maxillary palpi. It appears, therefore, that Heteranthidium could be placed as a subgenus of Trachusa. 




Genus: Paranthidium Cockerell and Cockerell
 Paranthidium is a Nearctic genus of moderate- to large-sized bees whose abdominal terga are usually maculated. Four species occur in this country, one of which occurs in the southeast corner of the Pacific Northwest. The closest relative of Paranthidium is the Old World genus Paraanthidium. With the possible exception of Stelis, it does not appear to be closely related to other anthidiine genera occurring in the New World, and it can easily be distinguished from other North American anthidiine genera by those characteristics cited in the key. 




Genus: Anthidium Fabricius
 Anthidium is a large genus of moderate- to large-sized bees distributed in both the New and the Old worlds. Forty species occur in America north of Mexico, of which 15 are found in the Northwest. Members of this genus are rather broad and robust and most closely resemble the genus Callanthidium. Together, they can be distinguished from all other North American anthidiines by a combination of several obvious characters: arolia absent; scopa present in females; and, metanotum without a median spine. 




Genus: Callanthidium Cockerell
 Callanthidium is a small genus of large bees restricted to the western United States. There are two species in the genus; both occur in the Northwest. Callanthidium is very closely related to Anthidium and may warrant only subgeneric ranking. The two genera can be separated only by those characters found in the key. 




Genus: Dianthidium Cockerell
 Dianthidium is a medium-sized genus of somewhat small bees represented in both the Old and New worlds, but most species are found in the Americas. Eighteen species are known from North America north of Mexico and eight are found in the Northwest. The Nearctic Dianthidium can be distinguished from other anthidiines by the large lamellae of the posterior lobes of the pronotum. All Dianthidium can be distinguished by the pronotal lamellae and by the presence of coxal spines on the hind legs, greatly extended in the males. The Nearctic bees of this genus (Dianthidium sensu stricto) are black with yellow or white integumental maculations. Occasionally there is a suffusion of red at the base of the abdomen. 




Genus: Anthidiellum Cockerell
 Anthidiellum is a small genus of small, robust bees occurring on all continents and represented in America north of Mexico by three species. One species, A. notatum robertsoni, occurs in the Northwest. In addition to characteristics used in the key, this genus may be distinguished from other maculated anthidiines by unusually coarse puncturation ; subantennal sutures arcuate outwardly; anterior face ofmesepisternum separated from lateral face by a carina; females with scopae; and preoccipital ridge carinate above rather than below. Genus Dioxys Lepeletier and Serville: Dioxys is a small Holarctic anthidiine genus parasitic on other megachilids. Seven species are found in North America of which three occur in the Northwest. The median spine on the metanotum distinguishes it from all other North American bees. In addition to the characteristics used in the key and structural modifications common to the parasitic habit, the genus possesses a number of distinguishing features: body with coarse puncturations and body without distinct integumental maculations, but sometimes reddish in females; abdominal tergites with apical pubescent fasciae; arolia absent; anterior face of mesepisterna separated from lateral face by a carina; and mandibles bidentate in both sexes. These distinguishing features of the genus support the tenet of some systematists that the taxon is an aberrant one deserving tribal rank. However, tribal rank should not be proposed before a comprehensive world study of the genus is completed. 




Genus: Stelis Panzer
 Stelis is a moderately large, worldwide genus parasitic on other Megachilinae, and in two cases on the apid, Euglossa. There are about 40 species in North America and 18 in the Northwest. It is a diverse group for which many generic names have been proposed. In the northwestern fauna, Protostelis is the most distinct and is considered as a separate genus here. Heterostelis, a segregate occurring in North America outside our area, also seems sufficiently distinct to warrant generic status. Other groups sometimes given generic rank, such as Microstelis, Melanostelisl Pavostelis, Stelidium, Stelidina, and Chelynia, are here considered as infrageneric taxa of the genus Stelis. One of the most characteristic features of all species of Stelis, as herein constituted, is a black, multi-toothed comb at the apex of metasomal sternum IV in the male. This suggests a relationship with Paranthidium, the only other anthidiine we were able to find with such a comb. Michener (1948) and Popov (1945) suggested that a number of the groups sometimes placed with Stelis might be independently derived from nonparasitic anthidiine genera. Since Heterostelis has only a hair fringe on sternum IV and Protostelis has a pair of finger-like processes instead of a comb, their conclusions may apply to these genera. Stelis females are readily separated from nonparasitic genera by the absence of a scopa. Both sexes can be distinguished from Dioxys by the absence of apical fasciae on the terga as well as the absence of the median metanotal spine, and from Protostelis and Heterostelis by the rounded summit of the mesepisternal declivity. The males are distinct from other anthidiines except Paranthidium on the basis of the comb on tergum IV, and from Paranthidium they can be distinguished by the absence of long, lateral projections on metasomal tergum VII. 




Genus: Protostelis Friese
 Protostelis is a small Neotropical and Nearctic genus with four or five North American species, of which laticincta is found in the Northwest. The close resemblance of this genus to the South American Bothranthidium suggests a common origin for the two genera. Protostelis may be distinguished from Stelis by the presence of the mesepisternal carinae and the deeply grooved basal area of the propodeum. Tribe Megachilini. The tribe Megachilini consists of a rather homogeneous subtribe, Megachilini, and a more diverse subtribe, Osmiini. Together they comprise 12 genera in North America, 11 of them northwestern. It is a world-wide tribe with numerous species, best distinguished from Anthidiini by simple tarsal claws in the female and larger stigmata. 




Tribe: Megachilini
 Subtribe: Megachilini 1. Arolium absent. 2. Tergum VI of male strongly produced medially and subapically, the projecting area strongly overhanging apical margin. Subtribe: Osmiini 1. Arolium present. 2. Tergum VI of male not convex medially and subapically or, if generally convex, the convexity uniform to apical margin. Subtribe Megachilini. The subtribe Megachilini consists of three genera in North America, all of them represented in the Northwest. Apparently at least two other genera are found in the Old World. The subtribe is more homogeneqVis than Osmiini, even though it possesses a rather widely divergent parasitic genus (Coelioxys). Megachilini s. str. is specialized in lacking an arolium and in having a strongly projecting subapical area medially on tergum VI of the male. 




Genus: Megachile Latreille
 Megachile is a large, worldwide genus, well represented in tropical forests, warm deserts, high mountains, and the subarctic as far as trees and shrubs extend. There are about 115 North American species, of which about 40 are found in the Northwest. The genus is diverse with many subgenera occurring throughout its range. As far as we know, all of the New World species merit the designation "leaf cutting bees," although the subgenus Sayapis uses more resin and mud in its nest construction than it does leaf pieces. An interesting feature of man)' males is a "flower-like" development of the front legs. This characteristic occurs in males of many subgenera, but it is usually not present in all species of the subgenus in which it occurs. Megachile is recognized by the absence of arolia, the presence of beveled intermediate areas on the mandibles of females, and the presence of four exposesome very large species occur. An East Indian species is reported to be the largest of all bees (M. pluto). 




Genus: Chelostomoides Robertson
 Chelostomaides is found in the New World and Eurasia. There are 18 North American species, 2 of which occur in the Northwest. Most authors have treated Chelostomoides as a subgenus of Megachile, but Michener considered it as a subgenus of Chalicodoma, a genus based on the Old World group of "mason bees." Although Chalicodoma and Chelostomoides both use substances other than leaf pieces for cell construction and neither has mandibles specialized for leaf cutting, there are few other similarities. The concealment and modification of sternum IV in the male occurs only in Chelostomoides, and this characteristic is accompanied by other differences from both Megachile and Chalicodoma. Consequently, we are considering Chelostomoides as a distinct genus, not particularly closely related to Chalicodoma. Chelostomoides can be distinguished from other New World Megachilini by the absence of beveled areas on the mandibles of the female and the concealment of tergum IV of the male. The species are more slender than most Megachile (except Sayapis). 




Genus: Coelioxys Latreille
 Coelioxys is a large, worldwide genus with about 50 North American species, of which about 18 are found in the Northwest. This genus is parasitic on Megachile and, although it has diverged considerably in many characters, it still retains some basic similarities. The erection of a separate subtribe or tribe for Coelioxys could probably be justified on the basis of its distinctness, but this would fail to indicate its apparent origin from a Megachile-like ancestor. The elongated, tapered abdomen, sharply pointed in the female and with a number of sharp or blunt, hornlike apical processes in the male, is highly characteristic. The strongly produced scutellum with horn-like axillae is unique within the tribe. In addition, the anterior face of the mesepisternum is separated from the lateral face by a strong carina that extends across the posterior lobes of the pronotum. The genus derives its name from its hairy compound eyes, a character otherwise known to be well developed in few other bees, for example, Apis and most Holcopasites. Subtribe Osmiini. Osmiini is a diverse subtribe with nine North American genera, eight of them found in the Northwest. Several of the genera have the metanotum nearly horizontal and the propodeum strongly slanting (a supposedly primitive characteristic in bees), but others have the thorax nearly as box-like as the subtribe Megachilini. There is considerable variation in the number and size of teeth on the apical margins of terga VI and VII of the male, but the subapical portion of tergum VI is not produced as it is in Megachilini. 




Genus: Chelostoma Latreille
 Chelostoma is a small Holarctic genus, consisting of six North American species (all western), two of which are found in the Northwest. Of the three other northwestern genera with slender body form, it resembles Hoplitis in having the anterior face of tergum I rounded but even more slender. It is much like Heriades in size, shape, and color, but Chelostoma is much less coarsely punctate and lacks a carina at the border of the anterior face of tergum I. It differs from either of the above and from Chelostomopsis in having three or four long projections on tergum VII of the male. The basal area of the propodeum is long and horizontal, about as long as the metanotum; the hind coxae are carinate along the inner ventral margins, and the metasomal terga are fasciate.




 Genus: Chelostomopsis Cockerell
 Chelostomopsis is based upon a single species, ribifloris, which is restricted to the far west. However, we have seen one specimen collected in Germany that apparently belongs to this genus. Like Hoplitis, Chelostomopsis is moderately slender but it has carinate hind coxae. The male bears some resemblance to Heriades but is less coarsely punctate and its metasoma has four visible sterna in repose. The female has several bizarre characteristics, including a spatulate process on the clypeus, a long curved bristle on the labrum (not present on the German specimen), and a head shaped like that of a carpenter ant. Genus Heriades Spinola: Heriades is Holarctic and Ethiopian with 10 North American species, 3 of which occur in the Northwest. It is a highly distinctive genus of small, slender bees with coarsely sculptured integument and a sharp carina bordering the anteriodorsal face of tergum I. The metasoma of the male is remarkable in having only two visible sterna in repose. Its relationships with other osmiine genera are obscure. Additional characteristics include a single row of plumose hairs along the apex of the metasomal terga and a carina along the inner ventral margin of each hind coxa. 




Genus: Ashmeadiella Cockerell
 Ashmeadiella is a Nearctic genus containing about 45 species (most of them in the arid west), nine of which reach the Northwest. The genus is set apart from all other osmiines in having a sharply differentiated anterior mesepisternal face, separated from the rest of the mesepisternum by a weak carina, most pronounced ventrally. The males differ from other osmiines, except some Chelostoma, in having four finger-like processes on sternum VI. However, in some species the processes are very short. The metasomal terga are distinctly fasciate apically, and in many species the integument is partially reddish. Ashmeadiella is apparently most closely related to Anthocopa, but it also resembles Proteriades. 




Genus: Hoplitis Klug
 Hoplitis is a moderately large Holarctic and Ethiopian genus with'about 26 North American species. Eleven of these are recorded from the Northwest. The genus is extremely diverse, with 10 North American subgenera currently recognized (Alcidamea Cresson, Andronicus Cresson, Chlorosmia Sla




Sawflies and wood-wasps (Symphyta)
 Sawflies are so named because their ovipositors are serrated to enable them to saw down into plant material where they then lay their eggs. All sawflies, except the family Cephidae, have a pair of cenchri behind the scutellum that hold the wings in place when the insect is at rest. This is absent from all Apocrita. Unfortunately this is of limited help as, unless they’re flying, their wings are generally folded over the body and you can’t see this detail. Sawflies also have a notch-like division in the first abdominal segment but same problem applies! They come in all shapes, sizes and colours and some of the wood-wasps have a prominent ovipositor. As mentioned above, the main thing to look for is the lack of any ‘waist’.




Potter and Mason wasps (Eumenidae)
 These are solitary wasps but closely related to social wasps and as a result are nearly all black and yellow, holding their wings either side of the body at rest. The pronotum reaches back to the tegulae and there is a single spur on the mid tibia. The absence of any markings on the mesothorax helps distinguish them from social wasps who generally have two or four yellow spots.




Solitary bees
 Separating the various solitary bees can be a challenge. They come in a range of sizes and colours and although some are obviously bee-like others can be confused with honey bees, bumblebees or wasps if you’re not careful. Also, they are often grouped according to the length and shape of the tongue, which is not very helpful if all you have is a photo, and females and males can also be quite different. While many solitary bees are catholic in their choice of food plant others only feed from a small range of flowers and some only one plant in particular, which can help with identification. Most solitary bees are pollen-gathering and carry their haul on their hind legs or in the case of many members of the Megachilidae family, on pollen brushes under the abdomen but there are also a few cuckoo species. The number of sub-marginal wing cells is often a helpful pointer in determining the family.




Digger wasps (Sphecidae)
 As suggested by the name, most dig a burrow and load it with prey for their grubs to devour. They are generally slender wasps, many having a broad head and the females often have spiky combs on their forelegs to help with the digging. Their pronotum only forms a small collar which helps separate them from other solitary wasps. Some species have noticeably long, thin, almost thread-like ‘waists’ but there are a few that superficially resemble social wasps. Some are all black but generally they’re black and yellow or black and red and hold their wings over the abdomen at rest.




Social bumblebees and Cuckoo bumblebees
 Most people will be familiar with bumblebees, those large, hairy buzzing things that hang around flowers all day. With a little care they can be identified by the pattern of coloured bands on the thorax and abdomen combined with the general shape of the face and length of the tongue. There are three casts - queens, workers and males which are often similar but can be different according to the species. Cuckoo bees, as their name suggests, take over bumblebee nests by kicking out the original queen and so tend to look generally similar to their hosts. The way to tell the difference is in the hind tibia - in female bumblebees it’s shiny, flat and wide with longish hairs on the edges and with cuckoos it’s dull, rounded, narrow and covered in fine hairs. Some cuckoo bumblebees also tend to have noticeably darkened wings.




Honey bees
 The males, or drones, are confined to the hive until mating time when they fly high up to find virgin queens and so are rarely seen. It’s worth noting that there are several sub-species of Apis mellifera - The ‘Dark’ or ‘European’ honey bee, the ‘Italian’ honey bee and the ‘Grey’ honey bee to name a few - and interbreeding between them is not uncommon, so there is some colour variation to contend with. The main thing to look for is the noticeably long costal cell in the forewing. Also there are several solitary bees that look similar, so if in doubt double-check!




Ants (Formicidae)
 There are about sixty species of ant in the UK although only a few are widespread. They are classed as hymenopteran insects because the breeding queens and males have wings with hamuli, although most of the time it’s the wingless workers that we see. Apart from colour (black, red or yellow) ants are usually told apart by their waist (aka pedicel or petiole) which can have one or two sections. Those of the sub-family Myrmicinae have two segments whereas the other sub-families (Formicinae, Dolichoderinae and Ponerinae) have one. Where you find ants is often a good clue to their species.




Gall wasps (Cynipidae)
 Gall wasps are tiny little things that have fat looking abdomens and sparse, distinctive wing venation. They lay their eggs into plant tissue (often oak trees) causing the host to form swellings or growths known as galls. Galls come in many shapes and sizes from the classic ‘oak apple’ to things that look like a wooly pom-pom to little flattish discs called spangle galls. Association with the host plant is often the best way to identify these little blighters.




Velvet ants (Mutillidae)
 Despite the name these insects are actually wasps but the females are wingless. There are only two UK species (Mutilla europraea and Smicrosmyrme rufipes) both of which have a brick red thorax and black abdomen with palish yellow markings.




Ichneumons (Ichneumonidae)
 Looking a bit like the Digger and Spider-hunting wasps already mentioned, Ichneumons are a huge family that varies from the tiny to reasonably big and are notoriously difficult to identify. They tend to be slender insects with long antennae and some possess intimidatingly long ovipositors. The front edges of the wings are quite thick as the costa and sub-costa sit right next to each other and they also have an obvious pterostigma.




Indanthidium
 Indanthidium are small bees ranging in length from 6-7.5 mm. They have black integument with yellow maculations and abdominal bands, which are divided into four spots on most of their terga. Arolia absent. Juxtantennal carina absent. Maxillary palpus is a single segment. Omaulus lacking carina. Preoccipital ridge lacking carina. Pronotal lobe carinate or lamellate. Stigma less than twice as broad as long. Subantennal sutures distinctly arcuate. T5 with the marginal zone depressed and punctured. Male S1 and S6 are not modified and lack combs. Male T7 is as broad as T6, and has median and lateral spines with smaller teeth in between the spines.




Spider-hunting wasps (Pompilidae)
 Superficially like Digger wasps these little devils use spiders as their prey of choice. As a consequence the females often have long legs, especially the hind femur, equipped with evil-looking spurs. The males are often smaller than the females as all they need to do is mate. They generally have longer antennae than Digger wasps although the general colouring can be similar. Nearly all species have three sub-marginal cells and their pronotum also reaches the tegulae. Like Diggers they hold their wings over the abdomen at rest.




Ruby-tailed wasps (Chrysididae)
 AKA Jewel-wasps, these are brightly coloured (red/blue/green), metallic looking insects that lay their eggs in a host nest, usually that of a solitary bee or wasp. They tend to have flat or slightly concave undersides and when seen from above appear to have three largish abdominal segments. Some look like they have a stinger but it is in fact an ovipositor.




Red honey bee (Apis koschevnikovi)
 Apis koschevnikovi is somewhat distinctive due to its reddish metasoma and legs. It is also known as the red bee of Sabah; however, its color changes with its distribution. It is pale reddish in the Sabah State or Borneo, Malaysia, but it has a darker, more coppery color in the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra, Indonesia. The body size of the worker is moderate (forewing length between 7.5-9 mm). Drones of A. koschevnikovi have a mating flight time that is different to the sympatric A. cerana drones. A. koschevnikovi is the host of the mite Varroa rinderi. Diagnostic characteristics: Hind wing with distal abscissa of vein M present (same as in Apis cerana). Mesoscutellum of the female worker yellowish-red. Drones with hairy fringe on the margin of the metatibia (setae along the posterior edge are much longer than the others) and with tarsi unmodified. Drones with unique endophallus. Sting apparatus with 10 lancet barbs and 4 pairs of stylet barbs. Distance from tip of lancet to the first barb = 45.30 microm.




Larinostelis
 Larinostelis are robust, black bees with extensive yellow markings that have a body length of 6.5 mm. This genus is known from a single female specimen. Arolia absent. Axilla carinate and extended laterally. Juxtantennal carinae present. Middle tibia with two apical spines. Omaulus carinate. Pronotal lobe carinate. Propodeum with fovea defined by a carina behind spiracle present. Propodeum with strong row of pits basally and a strong posterior carina. Female scopa absent.




Giant honey bee (Apis dorsata)
 Apis dorsata is among the largest species of bees (17-20 mm in body length and a forewing length of 12-15 mm). As in other species of honey bees, A. dorsata is highly variable in coloration depending on the race, which is also associated with the distribution. Apis dorsata is remarkable for having a well-organized mass defense reaction, where once an intruder is marked by being stung, it can be followed kilometers away. In addition, a single colony of A. dorsata can migrate between 100-200 km every year, and it is dependent on the dry and rainy seasons. 




Aztecanthidium
 Aztecanthidium have a somewhat elongate, parallel-sided body. They range in body length from 11-21 mm. They are either black with yellow maculations on their head and body, or almost entirely reddish-brown. Arolia present. Juxtantennal carina present. Omaular carina present but weak. Preoccipital ridge strongly carinate all the way to the hypostomal carinae. Pronotal lobe carinate. Propodeum without fovea defined by a carina behind spiracle. Scutellum bituburculate.




Austrostelis
 Austrostelis are slender and black bees that range in body length from 5.5-8.5 mm. They can have integument with variable amounts of pale yellow to orange maculations on the head, thorax, and abdomen, or can be almost entirely yellow. Austrostelis are cleptoparasites, so they lack scopa.




Benanthis
 Benanthis are slender-bodied bees that range in body length from 8–9 mm. They have black integument with yellow markings on their head and thorax, and they have medially broken maculate bands on the abdomen. Arolia present. Juxtantennal carina absent. Middle tibia with one apical spine. Omaular carina absent. Preoccipital carina absent. Pronotal lobe carinate. Subantennal sutures straight. Scutellum rounded. Female S6 with lateral teeth. Female T5 and T6 without lateral teeth. Male S4 and S5 without marginal combs or lateral teeth. Male T7 deeply bilobed.




Asian honey bee (Apis cerana)
 The Asian honey bee is one of the most morphologically diverse species of honey bees, to the extent that multiple subspecies or races are recognized. Asian honey bees have a body length of around 9 mm, and body coloration varies among the different races. A. cerana is the primary host of the parasitic mites Varroa jacobsoni and V. destructor. Female worker: body size moderate (forewing length 7-9 mm). Female worker: legs of rusty coloration.




Protosmia
 Protosmia are finely punctured, black bees with white hair on the thorax that range in body length from 3.5–9.5 mm. Body form can range from stocky and robust to slender. Protosmia are most often seen flying in the spring. The females of the only North American species, P. rubifloris, are easily recognizable by their distinct spatula-like process projecting out from the clypeus. Arolia present. Axilla rounded. Mesopleuron with ventral length shorter than its dorsal length. Omaulus without carina. Pronotal lobe carinate or, if lacking carina, with several minute carina behind where pronotal carina would be. Propodeum with pitted basal horizontal zone present but not limited posteriorly by a distinct carina. Preoccipital ridge without carina. Spatulate mid-apical projection on clypeus (in North American species). Stigma at least twice as long as broad. T1 lacks carina between dorsal and anterior surfaces (except in subgenus Afrosmia). T1 anterior surface concave. Male S1 with a brush of hair under the margin (Griswold 1985). Male S2 and S3 with posterior margins notched or stepped laterally (only in species from Eastern Hemisphere). Male T6 lacks preapical carina (unknown for P. burmanica). Female labrum with distinct preapical tuft of hair.




African carder bee (Afranthidium)
 Afranthidium are small to medium (5-10 mm) in length, with a robust body form. The base color of their thorax and head is often black. The abdomen can be black or brown, usually with unbroken, cream to yellow bands on each tergite. Females have mandibles with 3 to 8 teeth. Females with T6 apical margin frequently denticulate. Subantennal suture straight. Males without combs or specialized bristles on S3 to S5. Male penis valves are fused together.




Neofidelia
 Neofidelia are robust, medium-sized bees that range in body length from 9-12 mm. They are black with dense and long light-colored hairs covering their body. The basitarsi and tibia bear long setae that can resemble scopa; however, the setae are not used for pollen gathering and instead assist in throwing loosened substrates out the burrow during construction. Pollen is carried with the scopa on the ventral surface of the metasoma as in most Megachilidae. Clypeus separated from antennal bases by more than the diameter of the antennal socket. Forewings hairless with three submarginal cells. Female hind basitarsus slender and parallel-sided. Female mandible bifid or deeply bilobed. Male hind basitarsus enlarged, forming two curved talons. Male T7 lacks lateral spines.




Icteranthidium
 Icteranthidium often have black integument with extensive yellow markings on their head and thorax, and many species have almost entirely yellow abdomens. Their body length can range from 7.5-15 mm. Arolia absent. Axilla frequently pointed posteriorly. Omaulus carinate. Preoccipital carina absent behind the vertex, but strong laterally and continuing down to the lower mandible. Propodeum with fovea defined by a carina behind spiracle present. Pronotal lobe strongly lamellate. Female mandible has four teeth separated by shallow concavities. Female T6 is concave in profile. Female T6 with margin convex and with a median notch. Male T7 has a mid-apical projection. Occasionally, a lateral projection is present.




Trachusoides
 Trachusoides are large bees with a body length of 12 mm. They have a black head and thorax and a yellowish-red abdomen. This genus is only known from female specimens; male Trachusoides are unknown. Arolia absent. Middle tibia anterior and posterior margins equally convex and narrow at the apex of the base. Middle tibia narrower than hind tibia. Preoccipital ridge rounded. Pronotal lobe with strong carina. Propodeum without postspiricular pits or foveae. Scutellum distinctly overhanging metanotum. Tarsal claws are simple.




Microthurge
 Microthurge are slender black bees with pale bands of hair on the terga. They range in body length from 5-8 mm. Hind tibia coarsely tuberculate. Maxillary palpi is very short, two-segmented. Female with bifid tarsal claws. Female mandible with three teeth. Male arolia is absent. Male pygidial plate present.




Othinosmia
 Othinosmia are black bees with white hairs. They generally range in length from 5-8 mm, although one species, O. stupenda, is considerably larger and measures 9-12 mm in body length. Arolia present. Axilla is not produced at an acute angle, except in the subgenus Afrosmia. Metanotum not sloping abruptly. Pronotal lobe with carina absent, except in the subgenus Afrosmia. Stigma twice as long as broad or more.Female tarsal claws simple. Male T6 with a transverse preapical carina. Male T6 without lateral flap. Male S1 with midapical notch, except in the subgenus Afrosmia.




Wainia
 Wainia are black bees that often have apical bands of white hair on their terga. They can be small, slender, and elongate with a body length of 4.5 mm, or large and robust with an almost round abdomen and a body length of 10.5 mm. Arolia present. Metanotum sloping abruptly so that it faces posterior. Scutum with posterior lateral acute or right angle, sometimes produced posteriorly. Stigma twice as long as broad or more. Wing with two submarginal cells. T1 anterior face concave. T1 without raised carina where the anterior and dorsal faces meet. Parapsidal line linear and elongate. Male S2 large, often meeting T6 and covering the remaining sterna. Male T7 completely invaginated.




Hoplostelis
 Hoplostelis are robust parasitic bees that lack scopae. They range in body length from 8–14 mm, they have black or dark brown integument with yellow abdominal bands and patterning on the head and thorax that may be red or orange in some species. The markings in some species can be extensive, making them primarily yellow. Arolia present. Juxtantennal carina present. Middle tibia with one apical spine. Pronotal lobes carinate or lamellate. Propodeum with fovea behind spiracle. T1 with distinct carina where anterior and dorsal surfaces meet (only in subgenus Hoplostelis). Female scopa absent. Female clypeus with an apical tubercle or two apical processes. Female with strong protuberance near anterior articulation of mandible. Male S5 and S6 with lateral teeth present. Male T7 small, simple, or slightly bilobed. 




Paranthidium
 Paranthidium are bees with robust bodies that range in body length from 7.5–11.0 mm. They are nonmetallic and have black or brown integument with white to yellow abdominal, thoracic, or facial patterns. Some species have color patterning that is similar to that of a hornet (Wilson and Carril 2016). The presence of pollen-collecting hairs on the female abdomen and other characters make them easy to identify as a bee on close inspection. Arolia present. Middle tibia with a convex, lobe-like carina at apex. Omaular carina absent. Preoccipital carina absent. Pronotal lobes carinate or lamellate. Propodeum with fovea behind the spiracle, except in the subgenus Rapanthidium. Male S5 with lateral combs (Paranthidium s. str.). Male T7 trilobed, the median lobe always larger than the lateral lobes.




Bathanthidium
 Bathanthidium are small bees ranging in body length from 5.5–9 mm. Their coloration varies from all black to black with yellow medially broken bands on the terga. Arolia is present. Fovea behind propodeal spiracle present and defined by carina. Hind tibia with inner surface convex. Juxtantennal carina absent. Mid tibia with only one apical spine. Omaular carina absent. Pronotal lobe is weakly carinate. Preoccipital ridge is not carinate. Scutellum is rounded or medially emarginated and distinctly overhanging metanotum. Scutoscutellar suture forms two distinct fovea. Subantennal suture straight. Female T6 with apical margin simple. Male T6 is simple, and T7 ranges from simple to trilobed.